Once around the first light.
So after the big bang, there were no
stars and no galaxies. Just clouds of
hydrogen and helium. About 3/4 hydrogen,
one quarter helium. No heavy elements at
all. Nothing really interesting going
on.
And this was what before the first stars
form in the universe. It would have been
dark. This is the cosmic dark ages.
As the universe expand during the first
few hundred,000 years of its existence,
it would have been super hot and
cooling. And once the temperature
dropped below 4,000 Kelvin, the
temperature of the surface of an orange
dwarf star,
the
first atoms could start to form. You
don't get atoms above that temperature.
The it's above the ionization energy of
hydrogen and the electrons get ripped
away to form a plasma. And the plasma is
electrically charged particles which is
not transparent to light. So once the
neutral atoms form, suddenly the cosmos
becomes transparent and the photons that
exist of that 4,000 degree temperature
radiation can flow freely through the
neutral gas. And that is the cosmic
microwave background radiation that we
now see cooled all the way to 2.7 Kelvin
by being stretched by the factor of over
a thousand expansion in the universe
since that time.
So once that initial flash was released
then there was no more source of any
light and of course that flash fairly
quickly got stretched out of the visual
range.
But within a few tens, maybe a hundred
million years, we're not exactly sure,
gravity should begin to pull material
together again. The thicker, denser
lumps would have more gravity, would
pull themselves together, become denser
still in a runaway process that should
squeeze these knots of material to form
dense enough balls that become the cores
of the first stars, triggering off
nuclear fusion in them for the first
time and releasing vast amounts of
stored energy in the conversion of
hydrogen into helium
and so the first stars should light up
and we are on a quest to try to find
those first stars. Now they may well be
somewhat different to the stars that we
see around us today. The modern ones
like the sun we call population one.
Older ones from earlier epochs we call
population two. But these we would call
population three. They would be composed
only of the primordial hydrogen and
helium with none of the heavy elements
present in them. And that would change
things because the heavy elements can
catalyze
nuclear reactions. The so-called CNO
cycle is significant in large stars for
accelerating the rate of nuclear fusion.
And that changes the whole dynamic
between gravity and pressure. So these
stars would have been pure hydrogen and
helium only able to react hydrogen more
slowly and therefore you would have
needed them to have been much larger to
have triggered off the process in the
first place. So so far we have seen none
of these.
The very first hints came from looking
with the Spitzer Infrared Space
Telescope. And on the right hand side of
the panel there, you can see a lot of
foreground objects that have then been
deleted out of the background image. And
it's left that red and yellow glow
there, which is the possibility of the
glow from the first light about a
billion years or so after the big bang.
uh and this was detected as it says with
the Spitzer space telescope but it's
very low resolution very difficult uh to
make any measurements with this.
We have then gone on with newer
generations of telescopes to try to find
the first objects the most distant
objects in the universe.
And the record holder from Hubble was a
galaxy called GN Z11.
And Zed1 is the most distant object that
Hubble has ever seen. Most distant
because we are looking back at something
from a very very long time ago and the
light travel time has been truly
enormous. This was light emitted just
million years after the big bang. And
this pushed back the the limit from
about uh 1 billion to about half a
billion years after the big bang. Uh
right back narrowing that cosmic dark
age between the
cosmic microwave background and the
first light. So this was Hubble's record
holder. Uh here is uh an image and a
spectral image of it showing the
absorption pattern of Lyman alpha
hydrogen light and the Lyman alpha cliff
there showing up at just under two
microns. Um and that uh is telling us
that this galaxy has a red shift of 11.
Hence the Z11
uh name there. So the light has been
stretched by a factor of around about 11
in terms of wavelength. The exact
formula involves minus one, but we're
not going to worry about that.
And this was the record holder. It was
way more than most of the others that
Hubble was able to find. You can see it
on this plot here. And GN Z1 at the top
there. um just under 11 for the red
shift was the furthest. There were quite
a cluster at a red shift of around
eight, eight and a half um going on
towards 10, but this one was the record
holder. And the reason was it was lucky
there was very little in the way of
neutral hydrogen clouds along the line
of sight blocking our view of it. So we
had a clear path to it which enabled it
to be within the realms of detectability
by Hubble.
But now of course we have new toys. We
have the James Web Space Telescope with
a larger mirror, better cooling, so able
to not drown in its own heat bath in
terms of looking at infrared radiation.
It can look at longer, lower energy,
lower temperature infrared and therefore
delve to greater red shifts. So this one
is out at a a value of zed equals 14.44
z14
and that is now the the record holder.
And this pushes Hubble's uh GN Z1 back
into 14th place. In fact, with uh many
others that JWST has found
pushing the timeline from 420 to 280
million years after the Big Bang. Now,
these are galaxies, remember, but being
galaxies, we think they're composed of
stars. Uh the stars are too small to
see. So we think that this is uh the
starlight and that this is showing that
the cosmic dark ages were only a couple
of hundred million years old. And this
was a surprise. This is further back
than we thought. Um it doesn't
completely break physics or anything. Uh
it just breaks a few people's computer
models that just need to be revised to
take into account new observations.
That's how science works, right? Of
course, it can see with James Webb.
We're looking at this mid infrared light
out to 2,00 uh sorry 28 microns which is
uh 28,000 nanometers where of course
visible light is around about 500 to 700
nanometers. So much longer wavelengths.
Originally this light was shortwave
ultraviolet though we are looking at the
lyman alpha emission which is normally
in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum.
This uh is the uh deepest transitions
within the hydrogen atom that are
causing this particular wavelength of
light to be present. And we are seeing
it stretched all the way from
ultraviolet down into the mid infrared.
But if we wanted to go further and go
beyond a red shift of 14 and look at
even more distant objects,
we need something even better than James
Web for this purpose.
Interesting emissions of elements like
carbon and oxygen are ionized carbon
atoms. ionized oxygen atoms. We are
going to see them way down. They're they
start life not in the ultraviolet but
already in the 50 to 200 micron infrared
region. And that infrared is going to
have been stretched by a factor of uh
several hundred into millimeter or even
centimeter long wavelengths.
And that needs new telescopes.
One possibility is the origins telescope
that has been proposed a larger mirror
even than James Web with cooling 10
times lower temperature. So the uh in
James Webb was at 50 Kelvin with a 6 and
a half meter mirror. the origin space
telescope, we're talking about maybe a
15 meter diameter segmented mirror and
cooling down to less than 5 degrees
above absolute zero so that it's able to
go so much further into the infrared.
You need a bigger mirror because with
longer wavelengths, you're not going to
get the resolution. It's all about how
the width of the mirror compares to the
wavelength. That's the so-called doors
limit for telescopes. So, it's harder to
get finer detail with longer
wavelengths. Uh, so we need a bigger
mirror. We also need a bigger mirror
because it's much fainter and we've got
to collect the energy.
But even with origins, we're not going
to get all the way back. What we need to
do is start looking at radiation that is
not infrared, but is in the radio
spectrum. And one of the telescopes
that's doing a great job of this is the
ALMA
array, the Atacarmama large millimeter
array looking at millimeter long radio.
And you can see it in the photograph
here. This huge array of dishes linked
together as an intererometer. So all the
dishes act as one larger dish covering a
much larger diameter than you could
possibly build as a single uh entity.
And the advantage that radio waves have
is with the longer wavelength comes a uh
much lower frequency and it's within the
grasp of our computer technology to
phase align all of the signals. Um, our
computers run fast enough they can
measure the phase of the oscillations in
the electromagnetic waves and align all
of the signals from the different
antennas electronically to give us that
effect of a much larger telescope.
something that was pioneered in
Cambridge at the Mard Radio Astronomy
Observatory by Martin Riyle back in the
1960s
uh with the very first interferometers.
And what this will enable us to do with
this technique is start looking for the
effect that the first stars have on
neutral hydrogen in the early universe.
So, I've already said that after the big
bang, the universe cooled. By 380,000
years, we had the first hydrogen atoms
forming, creating neutral clouds of gas.
And
eventually, whenever it was what when we
finally discover this, it would be
fascinating to put some numbers on it.
The first stars would have lit up and
shone with high energy light, visible
light, ultraviolet light, capable of
energizing those clouds of neutral
hydrogen. Again, not ionizing them
necessarily, but energizing them, just
pumping some energy into them such that
they began to oscillate and emit at a
wavelength of 21 cm.
Now 21 cm red shifted
a lot from our point of view is going to
be a challenge to detect.
That 21 cm is important because it is a
natural frequency for hydrogen atoms.
Hydrogen atoms a proton and an electron
each of which have intrinsic spin and
that's uh half a unit of spin. And the
spin of the electron and the proton can
either be opposite to each other
canceling out or they can be aligned
with each other in parallel.
The spin opposed state is the lower
energy condition and the higher energy
is the spin parallel state. And the
difference between those two energy
states is really quite small,
corresponding to this energy of a photon
with a wavelength of 21 cm,
1,420
megahertz.
And you can see the exact number there,
21.10611453
cm. Very, very precise line of emission.
So if you have a cloud of hydrogen gas
left to its own devices and you pump a
little bit of extra energy into it, then
the
extra energy excites some of the atoms
into the higher energy spin parallel
state and then they relax back to the
spin opposed state and emit a photon of
21 cm radiation. It's a very slow
process. The energy difference is quite
small and there's little incentive
therefore for it to occur.
So run roughly on average 9 million
years is the period of time that any one
hydrogen atom will take to decay back to
the ground state, the lower energy
state. But if you have a huge cloud of
gas floating in the cosmos with uh 10^
the 40 hydrogen atoms in it, then enough
of them are going to be decaying at any
one moment to make the the uh glow of 21
cm radiation detectable.
Well, that's true if the object is
nearby, but if it's way off in the
distant universe, the red shift will
kick in. So if we go beyond our red
shift 15 that we've uh been able to
detect 21 cm will have been stretched to
3 1/2 m
further back having that distance from
or that time offset from the big bang to
just 128 million years with a zed of 25
and we're up to three uh from 3.5 to 5.5
m and go back again to Z equals 50, get
to 11 m uh in wavelength. You know,
these are really quite long wavelength
radio waves. And if you went all the way
back to just the moment after the Big
Bang, looking at the very, very earliest
times that you could for neutral
hydrogen, you'd be talking about
wavelengths with a red shift of 1,89.
And they would be 230 meter longwave
radiation for those who remember
longwave radios.
And indeed, radios is the problem. All
of these wavebands are now absolutely
cluttered with radio noise from earthly
transmissions. And that's why things
like this uh radio telescope in the um
one mile array south of Cambridge at the
Malard radio astronomy observatory
don't get used much anymore because the
wavelengths that they are sensitive to
are flooded with chatter from all of our
modern radio devices. both deliberate
transmissions and accidental radio noise
that our machines give off without even
trying. And so these wavebands of radio
astronomy are very difficult to observe
these days.
So what we need is a bigger telescope of
course and we need to put it somewhere
radio quiet and the best place is going
to be the far side of the moon. I love
this picture. This is taken by a
spacecraft looking back at Earth and the
moon. It's not a fake. It's a real image
of the far side of the moon
looks different, doesn't it? There
aren't the usual mare and uh the whole
moon looks very very flat and plain
there. Um and you can see the relative
sizes. It's an amazing shot taken from
about a million miles away from both the
Earth and the Moon. maybe threequarters
of a million miles from the moon.
And that would be a superb place to put
a radio telescope. Obviously, we'd have
to have a satellites or several of them
out in space that could relay the
signals and the data back to the earth
because the moon would be in the way and
blocking the radio signals. But that's
the whole point. We don't want all that
radio chatter from the earth. And so
what we are thinking of doing and I hope
that this goes ahead is to build a radio
telescope in a crater on the moon. Um
the large lunar crater radio telescope
LCR.
Um you could find a suitable crater,
suspend a mesh of wires within it um and
hang an antenna. And this is entirely
within the bounds of possibility. Be
fairly straightforward to do. In fact,
we've already done it. On picture on the
left is the Aroscibo radio telescope
dish um that was put up in a crater of
uh the hillside there in Puerto Rico.
Sadly, no more because a hurricane
caused the antenna to collapse. But the
principle is correct. And of course,
there are no hurricanes on the moon. So,
uh why not? This would be a fantastic
place to be able to observe these very
long wavelength
uh radio waves and of course long
wavelength. We need a large dish. So
something several kilometers across and
there are plenty of craters on the moon
to choose from. So I really look forward
to seeing the results from such a radio
telescope. It would be a fantastic
window on the universe and maybe enable
us to detect the evidence of the first
light ever to be created by the first
generation of stars that lit up after
the big bang.
Thanks very much for listening.